Add definition for implicit/explicit ARIA attributes (#2154)
auto-wcag/auto-wcag: pages/glossary/aria-attribute-set.md

---
title: ARIA state or property is set
key: aria-attribute-set
unambiguous: true
objective: true
input_aspects:
  - Accessibility tree
  - CSS styling
  - DOM tree
---

> An ARIA [state][aria state] or [property][aria property] is <dfn>set</dfn> on an [HTML element][namespaced element] when it has a value. This may happen in three ways:

Reviewer: The term "value" brings to mind the explicit value of an attribute. What if we replace it with "when the accessibility tree exposes its value."

Author: This proved tricky, especially in combination of https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/pull/2154#discussion_r1466221360 😅 

TLDR: DOM/HTML define the "value" of an attribute as the stuff written in the HTML code, which differs from our "attribute value", making everything hard to write. Here, we want to refer to the "value as written" since, presumably, the incorrect values could be dropped by parsing/validation and thus not make it to the "attribute value". Plus, as @carlosapaduarte stated, we do want rules to validate the "value as written" and thus not really bake it into this definition

Anyway, I tried to improve the situation…

> - It is <dfn id="aria-attribute-set:explicit">explicitly set</dfn> if there is a corresponding `aria-*` HTML attribute on the element, whose value is valid for this ARIA [state][aria state] or [property][aria property].

Reviewer 2: "whose value is valid for this ARIA state or property"
Shouldn't this be checked by [ARIA state or property has valid value](https://www.w3.org/WAI/standards-guidelines/act/rules/6a7281/proposed/)?

Author: See https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/pull/2154#discussion_r1474206470

  For example, `aria-label` is explicitly set on `<button aria-label="Next page">Next</button>`.

- It is <dfn id="aria-attribute-set:implicit">implicitly set</dfn> if there is no corresponding `aria-*` HTML attribute on the element, but the element has an [implicit semantic role][implicit role] that has a value for this ARIA [state][aria state] or [property][aria property] defined in [HTML Attribute State and Property Mappings][aria attribute mapping].

  For example, `aria-checked` is implicitly set on `<input type="checkbox" checked />`.

> - It is <dfn id="aria-attribute-set:default">set by default</dfn> if there is no corresponding `aria-*` HTML attribute on the element, and the element has an [implicit semantic role][implicit role] that has a default value for this ARIA [state][aria state] or [property][aria property].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It is <dfn id="aria-attribute-set:default">set by default</dfn> if there is no corresponding `aria-*` HTML attribute on the element, and the element, along with its attributes, has an [implicit semantic role][implicit role] that has a default value for this ARIA [state][aria state] or [property][aria property].
```

just to clarify that some attribute might affect the "default" value for the element.

> - It is <dfn id="aria-attribute-set:default">set by default</dfn> if there is no corresponding `aria-*` HTML attribute on the element, and the element has an [implicit semantic role][implicit role] that has a default value for this ARIA [state][aria state] or [property][aria property].

Reviewer 2: It is really hard to differentiate between implicitly set and set by default according to these definitions (the later is a subset of the former). Do we really need two definitions? Can we just have explicitly and implicitly set in the "Element with role attribute has required states and properties" rule?

Author: Indeed, definition was a bit weak. I do believe these are still different and it might be valuable to be able to speak about one or the other (maybe not immediately, though…)
I improved the definition to make the difference more obvious. It is still a bit of a weak difference (depends which specs is setting it, essentially…) 🤷

---
title: ARIA state or property is set
key: aria-attribute-set
unambiguous: true
objective: true
input_aspects:
  - Accessibility tree
  - CSS styling
  - DOM tree
---

An ARIA [state][aria state] or [property][aria property] is <dfn>set</dfn> on an [HTML element][namespaced element] when it has a value. This may happen in three ways:

> - It is <dfn id="aria-attribute-set:explicit">explicitly set</dfn> if there is a corresponding `aria-*` HTML attribute on the element. If the [value][html attribute value] as written in the HTML code is not valid for this ARIA [state][aria state] or [property][aria property] and then the attribute is set but does not have an [attribute value][].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- It is <dfn id="aria-attribute-set:explicit">explicitly set</dfn> if there is a corresponding `aria-*` HTML attribute on the element. If the [value][html attribute value] written in the HTML code is not valid for this ARIA [state][aria state] or [property][aria property] then the attribute is set but does not have an [attribute value][].
```

> - It is <dfn id="aria-attribute-set:explicit">explicitly set</dfn> if there is a corresponding `aria-*` HTML attribute on the element. The [value][html attribute value] as written in the HTML code may or may not be valid for this ARIA [state][aria state] or [property][aria property] and therefore the attribute may or may not have an [attribute value][]

Reviewer 3: The second sentence is phrased a bit confusingly to me. Could we change it to something like:
```suggestion
- It is <dfn id="aria-attribute-set:explicit">explicitly set</dfn> if there is a corresponding `aria-*` HTML attribute on the element. If the [value][html attribute value] as written in the HTML code is not valid for this ARIA [state][aria state] or [property][aria property], then the [value][html attribute value] will not have an [attribute value][]. 
```
We could also add a sentence about when the value is valid, but that operates as one would expect (the valid value is the value of the attribute), so I'm not sure the extra verbosity is worth it.

>   For example, `aria-label` is explicitly set on `<button aria-label="Next page">Next</button>`; and `aria-checked` is explicitly set on `<input type="checkbox" aria-checked="yes" />`, even though it does not have an [attribute value][].

Reviewer 4: just wondering if it would be better to use a different example for `<input type="checkbox" aria-checked="yes" />` since these attributes generally shouldn't be used together and the value of `checked` will be `false` on the accessibility tree

> - It is <dfn id="aria-attribute-set:implicit">implicitly set</dfn> if there is no corresponding `aria-*` HTML attribute on the element, but the element or one of its HTML attribute has an [ARIA attribute mapping][aria attribute mapping] setting this ARIA attribute.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- It is <dfn id="aria-attribute-set:implicit">implicitly set</dfn> if there is no corresponding `aria-*` HTML attribute on the element, but the element or one of its HTML attributes has an [ARIA attribute mapping][aria attribute mapping] setting this ARIA attribute.
```

>   For example, `aria-checked` is implicitly set both on `<input type="checkbox" checked />` (through the [presence of the HTML attribute `checked`][checked present]) and `<input type="checkbox" />` (through its [absence][checked absent]); however, it is not set on `<input type="text" />` given that the mapping for `checked` doesn't apply when the `input` element is not of type `checkbox` or `radio`.

Reviewer 3: Personal preference, but I would prefer to remove the `; however,` and just split it into two sentences. Its quite long as is.
